This 2021 convention is being broadcast
in 240 lands.
We anticipate
that over 14 million individuals
will be able to enjoy the program
by this means.
Your generous donations make this possible.
Donations can be made online
at donate.jw.org.
In the past, Jehovah performed miracles
that strengthened the faith of his servants.
Is he performing miracles in our day?
Let’s listen as Brother David Splane
of the Governing Body
provides the answer in the talk
“Jehovah’s Powerful Works Inspire Faith.”
Jehovah is a Miracle Worker.
What’s a miracle?
How would you describe it?
Well, let’s give a simple definition.
A miracle is a powerful work
that can’t be explained in human terms.
Whenever Jehovah performs a miracle,
he has a purpose.
And one reason might be
to strengthen the faith of his servants.
And that’s the title of this talk,
“Jehovah’s Powerful Works Inspire Faith.”
Well, we love to consider
the miracles recorded in the Bible.
It’s really faith-strengthening, isn’t it?
So during this talk,
we’re going to consider just a few.
How about this one?
Jehovah leads the Israelites out of Egypt.
They arrive at the Red Sea,
and it seems they’re trapped.
The sea is ahead of them;
Pharaoh and his armies are behind.
But Jehovah causes
the waters of the Red Sea to part,
and the Israelites cross over on dry land.
When Pharaoh and his armies follow,
Jehovah brings the sea
back to its normal condition,
and the cream of the crop
of Egyptian manhood drowns.
Now, we know what effect
that miracle had on the Egyptians,
but what effect
did it have on the Israelites?
Let’s see.
Exodus 14:31
(I’ll give you a moment
so you can find that),
Exodus chapter 14
and verse 31—it says:
“Israel also saw the great power
“that Jehovah wielded against the Egyptians,
“and the people began to fear Jehovah
and to put faith in Jehovah.”
So that miracle
inspired faith in the Israelites.
Now, they weren’t the only ones
who were impressed by that miracle.
Let’s fast-forward 40 years.
Two spies enter Jericho and go
to the house of Rahab the prostitute.
And she says to them:
“We heard how Jehovah
“dried up the waters of the Red Sea . . .
“When we heard about it, we lost heart, . . .
“for Jehovah your God
is God in the heavens above
and on the earth beneath.”
Just hearing about that miracle
inspired faith in Rahab.
Now, another person whose faith was
strengthened by a powerful work
might surprise you:
the Queen of Sheba.
Well, the Queen of Sheba,
what was the powerful work?
Outstanding wisdom.
She’d heard about the wisdom of Solomon,
and her curiosity got the better of her.
She just had to see if the report was true.
And that involved a 1,200-mile trip
from her country to Jerusalem.
The trip turned out
to be well worth the effort.
At the end of the visit,
the Queen of Sheba said to Solomon:
“May Jehovah your God be praised,
who has taken pleasure in you
by putting you on the throne of Israel.”
She gave credit to Jehovah for what she saw.
Now, we don’t know if she ever
became a worshipper of Jehovah,
but Jesus said
that she’d ‘rise up in the judgment’
and “condemn” those Jews
who wouldn’t even cross the street
to listen to the Son of God.
Well, those are just two examples
and, as you know,
there are many more in the Bible.
The apostle Paul lists some of them
at Hebrews chapter 11,
and we’re going to read verses 32 to 34,
Hebrews chapter 11 (I’ll give you a moment),
verses 32-34.
And I’m going to read verse 32 first,
Hebrews 11:32 (have you got it?):
“And what more will I say?
“For time will fail me
if I go on to relate about Gideon,
“Barak, Samson, Jephthah,
David, as well as Samuel
and the other prophets.”
Now, as I read verses 33 and 34,
I want you children
to look at the events
that are being described
and see if you can guess who was involved.
Who was the object of this miracle?
So let’s read verse 33;
it says: “Through faith
“they defeated kingdoms,
“brought about righteousness,
obtained promises,
“stopped the mouths of lions,
“quenched the force of fire,
“escaped the edge of the sword,
“from a weak state were made powerful,
became mighty in war,
routed invading armies.”
Now, let’s go back and see
if we can identify individuals
who were involved in those miracles.
How about “defeated kingdoms”?
Did you come up with someone?
Let’s talk about Gideon.
Now, we like Gideon.
He reminds us of us.
He wasn’t exactly brimming with confidence.
When an angel approached him
and indicated that Jehovah
had work for him to do,
Gideon said:
“My clan is the least in Manasseh,
and I am the most insignificant
in my father’s house.”
He said something else,
something that has a bearing
on the theme of our discussion.
He said to the angel:
“If Jehovah is with us, . . .
where are all his wonderful acts
that our fathers related to us?”
Yes, where were the powerful works?
Before he was going to stick his neck out,
Gideon wanted some kind of reassurance
that he had Jehovah’s blessing.
What to do?
What was the angel going to do?
He performed a powerful work,
and that inspired faith in Gideon.
Later, Gideon’s confidence
was further boosted
by three other remarkable signs
—two involving a fleece
and another involving a God-given dream.
Now, with those powerful works
in mind and with Jehovah’s help,
Gideon did the impossible.
With 300 men,
he defeated an army of 135,000.
Well, now, what’s the takeaway?
What’s the lesson for us?
With Jehovah on our side,
we are never outnumbered.
Let’s go back to verse 33.
Now, you children,
I’m sure you’re going to get this next one,
verse 33:
“stopped the mouths of lions.”
Who did that?
Well, it was the same one
who helped Gideon defeat the Midianites.
It was Jehovah.
But what was the circumstance?
Well, you know.
It was when Daniel
was thrown into the lions’ pit.
Now, when Daniel was condemned to die,
he didn’t know for sure
that Jehovah was going to rescue him.
But he knew that Jehovah
would do the right thing.
He could have that confidence because Jehovah
had been with him throughout his life.
Daniel had been condemned to die once before.
Now, wait a minute; let’s think about that.
When was that?
Well, it was when
the king of Babylon had a dream,
and he decreed that unless Daniel
and the other wise men of Babylon
could tell him what he dreamed
and then relate the meaning of the dream,
they would all be put to death.
That called for a powerful work.
Jehovah provided Daniel
with the information he needed,
and Daniel’s life was saved.
Well, that was Babylon.
Now we’re in Persia, and Daniel
is once more facing death—death by a lion.
And once again, Jehovah comes to the rescue.
He temporarily shuts
the mouths of those lions.
Well, we can imagine
what effect that had on Daniel.
But what about us today?
What’s the takeaway?
What’s the lesson?
Today, Satan
is “[walking] about like a roaring lion,
seeking to devour someone.”
We may never know how often
Jehovah shuts the mouth of that lion
—how often Jehovah protects his people
as a group from Satan.
When we’re working from door to door,
for example.
It’s dangerous out there!
And we probably have no idea
how busy the angels are in our behalf.
And if someone does lose his life
while in Jehovah’s service or at a meeting
—and it has happened—
his loved ones can be sure of two things.
First of all,
their loved one did not
lose Jehovah’s approval.
And second, the loss is only temporary.
Satan can never do us any lasting harm.
One day Jehovah will shut
that lion’s mouth permanently.
Now, back to Hebrews 11,
and this time we’re reading verse 34,
and I’m sure you kids
are going to guess this one,
verse 34:
“quenched the force of fire.”
Of course!
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.
They were court officials in Babylon.
And you’ll recall that one day,
King Nebuchadnezzar
made a huge image of gold
and demanded that everybody worship it.
Anyone who refused would be thrown
into the burning fiery furnace.
Well, that was a time to remember
Jehovah’s powerful works of the past.
And the three men had experienced that,
probably when they were just teenagers.
Can you think of how?
When they arrived in Babylon,
they were taken to the palace
for special training,
and they were told to eat whatever
was put in front of them.
In this case, some of the food
was prohibited under the Mosaic Law.
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego
refused to eat those foods,
and they asked to be given
vegetables and water instead.
Now, for some of you children,
just the thought of having
to eat vegetables all the time
is probably quite a test.
But now, think of the results of this diet.
After only 10 days,
the three young men
were in much better health
than those who had followed the king’s diet.
Now, if you’ve ever had to follow a diet,
you know that there’s no way
that you can show improvement
in just 10 days.
Jehovah had to have been involved.
Now they were facing death.
They knew their God.
They knew what he was capable of.
They told the king that if it
was the will of God, they would be rescued,
but if not, they still wouldn’t worship
the image of gold.
They knew that if Jehovah
chose not to intervene miraculously,
it was not a sign of his disapproval.
Well, you know what happened.
They were thrown into the fiery furnace,
but God sent his angel to protect them.
And when they stepped out of the furnace,
there wasn’t even the smell of fire on them.
Their integrity also resulted
in a great witness.
When the king saw
that they were alive and well,
he praised Jehovah; he said:
“Praised be the God of Shadrach,
“Meshach, and Abednego . . .
“There is no other god who is able to rescue
like this one.”
What a witness that gave!
Well, that’s what happened back then.
What’s the takeaway?
What’s the lesson?
Today, many brothers are facing
the heat of adversity—Russia, for example.
Now, many brothers
have been given long prison sentences
because they won’t bow down to the state.
Now, Jehovah doesn’t prevent
this from happening
any more than he prevented
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego
from being thrown into the furnace.
But he does help them.
What do we notice about them
as they’re being led off to prison?
They’re smiling.
They’re serene.
They’re at peace.
They know their God.
And when they come out, there won’t
even be the smell of fire on them.
Their faith will be intact.
Their fine conduct also results
in a good witness to the jailers
and others who hear about the persecution.
Well, we’ll take one more example
in verse 34:
“escaped the edge of the sword.”
I was thinking of Elisha.
Now, in the days of the prophet Elisha,
the king of Syria went to war against Israel,
and he called a war council,
and the Syrians
secretly planned their strategy.
But Jehovah kept telling Elisha
what the Syrians were up to,
and Elisha kept telling the king of Israel.
The Syrians were furious,
and the king sent a large army
to capture Elisha.
What ingratitude!
Why do we say that?
Because in the previous chapter,
we read that Elisha
had cured the leprosy of Naaman,
a chief of the Syrian army, and now
a large Syrian army was hunting Elisha down.
We hope Naaman wasn’t among them.
Finally, the Syrians found
the city where Elisha was,
and they surrounded it.
Elisha’s attendant was scared to death,
but Elisha wasn’t afraid.
Second Kings chapter 6,
verses 16, 17 explains why.
This is encouraging—faith-strengthening.
Let’s look it up—2 Kings chapter 6,
verses 16, 17.
Now, this is Elisha talking to his attendant:
“‘Do not be afraid!
“‘For there are more who are with us
“than those who are with them.’
“Then Elisha began to pray and say:
“‘O Jehovah, open his eyes,
please, that he may see.’
“Immediately Jehovah opened
the attendant’s eyes and he saw,
“and look! the mountainous region
“was full of horses and war chariots of fire
all around Elisha.”
Well, that was a miraculous occurrence.
That was faith-strengthening indeed.
What’s the takeaway?
What’s the lesson for us?
Well, one day we’ll be faced
with hosts of modern-day Syrians.
What’s going to help us
to remain calm, unafraid?
We’ll look heavenward
and with our eyes of faith,
we’ll see myriads
of angels encamped all around us.
We know that Jehovah will do the right thing,
whatever is in harmony with his will.
I hear you say: “I’d like to see a miracle.
That would help a lot
to strengthen my faith.”
We see miracles every day.
What’s a miracle?
It’s a powerful work
that can’t be explained in human terms.
A modern example of that is prayer.
Isn’t prayer amazing?
Can you explain it?
Jehovah can listen to millions
of prayers in any language all at once.
That’s a miracle!
But how does prayer build our faith?
When we pray about a problem
that nobody but Jehovah knows about
and our prayer is answered,
our faith is strengthened.
Now, that is powerful.
And what about all the experiences we hear
when someone desperately prayed to God:
“If you exist, please send someone
to teach me about you”
and ten minutes later,
a Witness knocks on the door?
Coincidence or a miracle?
Another miracle: our Christian brotherhood
—isn’t it remarkable?
Who can explain it?
Former enemies become fast friends.
You can go to a Kingdom Hall
anywhere in the world
and you will find your brothers and sisters.
They’ll be glad to see you.
You’ll feel at ease.
You’ll know what they believe and what
they’ll be studying at the meetings.
You’ll see and feel the love.
In times of ethnic cleansing,
how often do we read
of brothers and sisters who risk their lives
to hide fellow believers who happen
to be from another tribe?
You know, when I think
of a loving brotherhood,
I always think of the experience
Jack Johansson related in his life story.
Brother Johansson
was a missionary serving in Malawi
at a time when the country was experiencing
tremendous political unrest and violence.
Now, he and a young African brother
set out to check on
the welfare of Witnesses
in another part of the country.
But along the way, they encountered
a soldier who wasn’t friendly.
He said to the African brother,
“I have to shoot the white man.”
He was serious.
As he raised his gun to fire,
the young African brother thrust himself
between the gunman
and Brother Johansson and said:
“Shoot me!
Shoot me, instead!”
Well, that soldier was so touched
by the love of our young African brother,
that he put his gun down.
When you hear experiences like that,
it makes you proud
to be part of Jehovah’s organization.
Why is it that Jehovah
is gathering us into an organization?
There’s an interesting detail recorded
at Isaiah 43:10.
I’d like you to look it up.
Now, when you hear Isaiah 43:10,
you say: “I know that.
It’s about ‘“You are my witnesses,”
says Jehovah.’”
And that’s true.
But we’re going to focus
on another part of the verse.
So Isaiah 43:10:
“‘You are my witnesses,’ declares Jehovah,
“‘Yes, my servant whom I have chosen,
“‘[now notice this] so that you may know
and have faith in me.’”
Before we can have faith in Jehovah,
we have to get to know him.
We have to learn about his powerful works,
those past and those present.
And as we study his dealings
with his people in the past,
we see that Jehovah
always keeps his promises.
He’s promised to bring
about a righteous new world.
Now, we can take that promise to the bank.
And through prayer and association
with his organization,
we can experience the modern-day miracles
that Jehovah is performing.
The more we know about Jehovah,
the more we’ll love him.
The more we love him,
the more we’ll want to tell others about him.
The more we preach,
the stronger our faith will become,
and we will be made powerful by faith.
Thank you, Brother Splane,
for that thrilling review
of Jehovah’s powerful works.
In the Bible, we read of those
who showed faith
while their contemporaries did not.
Why the difference?
What can we learn from those
who showed faith?
Take note of the lessons
in the upcoming five-part symposium.
Each speaker will introduce
the one to follow.
Brother William Turner,
a helper to the Service Committee,
will deliver the first talk entitled
“Imitate the Faithful, Not the Faithless
—Abel, Not Cain.”
As humans,
we are designed with the ability
to imitate what we see and hear.
For example,
we learn to talk by imitating
the language and accent of our parents.
And as we grew up,
we probably also adopted the attitudes
and actions of people we associated with.
Clearly, the example of others
can have a powerful influence on us.
Today, more than ever,
we need to copy good examples of faith.
Why?
Because we are living in a time
when our faith will be tested in many ways.
But note what we will have to do.
I invite you, please,
to turn with me to the book of Jude,
and follow along as we read
verse 20 in the book of Jude.
It says: “But you, beloved ones,
“build yourselves up on your most holy faith,
and pray with holy spirit.”
To help understand this verse,
think of what a homeowner might do
if he knows
a really bad storm is approaching.
Likely, he will take steps to build up,
or strengthen, his home
—from repairing cracks in the foundation
to reinforcing the doors, walls, and windows.
Well, in a similar manner,
you and I must take steps to build up,
or strengthen, our faith
so that we can protect ourselves
against the onslaught of tests
and trials we are likely to face.
You notice, Jude said that we must
continue ‘building ourselves up
on our most holy faith,’
which are the Christian teachings
found in God’s Word.
And as we study God’s Word
and pray for his help,
we can gain strength
by learning from the examples set
by different Bible characters.
There is so much that can be learned
from the examples of those in ancient times.
Each talk of this symposium
will highlight ways
in which we can imitate the faith
of Jehovah’s loyal servants of the past
and reject the course of faithless ones.
Let’s start by examining the example of Abel.
He was one of the first humans,
the fourth, in fact, to exist on earth.
The Bible describes Abel as a righteous man.
He built up a record
of living according to Jehovah’s standards,
but his family, however, did not.
We are well familiar with his parents,
Adam and Eve.
They both rebelled against Jehovah.
And his older brother, Cain,
well, he was not a positive role model.
The Bible described Cain
as one whose “own works were wicked.”
So you think about that:
When you look at Adam, Eve, and Cain,
who all displayed a lack of faith in Jehovah,
can you imagine what that family dynamic
must have been like for faithful Abel?
The tension, hostility,
resentment, lack of spiritual discussions
—do you think Abel’s faith was tested?
Indeed, it was.
And today, our faith may
likewise be tested by the actions
of those who choose not to serve Jehovah.
We invite you
to watch the following reenactment.
As you do,
note how a sister’s faith is tested.
I arrived in a new city
during the rainy season.
It rained all day every day
for a whole month.
At that time,
there were only three publishers there.
The first sister I met
was my new pioneer partner.
At first,
I felt as if the people in this territory
spoke a different language.
When I tried to talk to some people
about the Bible, they did not like it
and some were even afraid of these new ideas.
When government officials
noticed that we had shared
some tracts with the people,
they began to watch us
and followed us for about three months.
I felt overwhelmed by all of this
and became very anxious.
I had few return visits
or opportunities to speak about Jehovah.
I felt lost.
I didn’t know what to do or where to go.
I often wondered,
‘Father, why did you send me here?’
It was like I had gone
from being on a mountain peak
to the bottom of a deep valley.
As our sister adjusted
to her new circumstances,
did you note how her trials made her feel?
Anxious, lost, and overwhelmed.
Perhaps you’ve experienced similar feelings
when dealing with tests of your faith.
So how can Abel’s
example of faith help you and me?
Let’s notice what he did.
Turn with me, please, to the book of Hebrews,
and we’re going to read Hebrews chapter 11
and verse 4.
There we read:
“By faith Abel offered God
“a sacrifice of greater worth
than that of Cain,
“and through that faith
“he received the witness
that he was righteous,
“for God approved his gifts,
and although he died,
he still speaks through his faith.”
Abel built strong faith in Jehovah,
even though those around him failed to do so.
Let’s consider three steps that he took.
First:
Abel took time to ponder spiritual matters.
For instance,
he no doubt discerned
Jehovah’s love and wisdom in creation.
As a shepherd, perhaps he looked
at his sheep and recognized
that they needed someone
to guide and protect them.
And Abel likely discerned that as humans,
we too need someone to guide and protect us
—someone far wiser
and more powerful than any human.
The second step:
Abel prayed and acted on what he learned.
Even though his knowledge was limited,
it was enough
—enough for him to act in faith.
No doubt Abel appealed to Jehovah
in prayer to accept his sacrifice,
and Jehovah approved his gift.
Abel demonstrated his faith so powerfully.
Did you note in verse 4, it tells us
that his example still “speaks” to us today?
At times, we may feel that we
don’t have enough knowledge or experience
to demonstrate faith like Abel.
But that’s OK.
It doesn’t have to be an obstacle.
Pray to Jehovah, and make the most
of the knowledge that you do have.
Act in faith, and Jehovah will help you.
The third step:
Abel remained steadfast when under trial.
He didn’t let the actions
of his family affect his faith,
and we can’t let the actions
of others affect ours.
We must never allow something
that another person says or does
to make us feel ashamed
of being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
So be ready.
Be quick to identify yourself
as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
It will help to build and fortify your faith.
We can also learn
from the bad example set by Cain.
At Genesis 4:6, 7,
Jehovah warns Cain about his attitude,
and he urges him to turn to doing good.
But just like his faithless parents,
Cain determined that he
knew what was best for himself,
and his actions
led to the murder of his brother.
We may go through situations where,
because of imperfection,
we don’t always use the best judgment
or it causes us
to develop a negative attitude.
But when the matter
is brought to our attention,
how will we respond?
You see, let’s not imitate
the faithless example of Cain.
Let’s not feel
that we always know what’s best.
But let’s see that warning
as a loving tap on the shoulder
from our heavenly Father
and allow it to readjust our thinking
so that we can build our faith
and preserve our relationship with him.
Well, let’s now go back to our sister.
In the following reenactment,
note how she imitates Abel’s faith.
I studied the Bible
to see how Jehovah
cared for his servants in the past.
For example,
I read how Jehovah
told Jacob throughout his life:
‘I will be with you wherever you go.’
I pictured Jehovah
telling me the same thing:
‘Don’t worry.
Just go,
and I will always be there to help you.’
I begged him to help me
to be balanced, to feel peace,
and to have courage
to go out in the ministry.
One day, Jehovah helped me
to find a very good Bible student.
It was an absolutely wonderful
and unexpected gift from Jehovah.
Our small group joins
congregation meetings through the Internet.
This arrangement is a valuable source
of spiritual food for me.
We get together for meals
and association as well.
The experiences on JW Broadcasting®
make me feel that I am not alone.
And I always smile
and wave goodbye at the end.
It’s wonderful to be here.
Did you notice how our sister
built up her faith in Jehovah?
She imitated Abel’s example,
and she followed those steps.
The first step:
She pondered on spiritual matters.
She studied the Bible to see how Jehovah
cared for his servants in the past,
and then she applied
what she learned to her situation.
Then, the second step:
She prayed and acted on what she learned.
Her prayer was that Jehovah help her
to be balanced, to feel peace,
and to have courage to go into the ministry.
And then she acted in faith.
And despite the challenges in the ministry,
she took the third step:
She remained steadfast under trial.
She persevered and was blessed with a study.
And then she reinforced her faith
by joining in congregation meetings
and benefiting from the wholesome
association of the brotherhood.
And what was the result?
Jehovah blessed her efforts.
If you and I follow these steps,
he will bless our efforts as well.
By utilizing this tremendous gift
Jehovah has given us
—the power of example—
you and I can imitate Abel.
And as we build and fortify our faith,
we will weather any storm of adversity
that comes our way.
Brother Gary Breaux,
a helper to the Service Committee,
will now present
the next talk of this symposium,
“Imitate the Faithful, Not the Faithless
—Enoch, Not Lamech.”
Without warning, our faith
could suddenly be tested
by how we react in a violent encounter.
Yes, our faith may be tested as Enoch’s was.
Ungodliness and violence
were commonplace before the Flood,
and the Scriptures clearly indicate
how people reacted.
We are told that the faithful man Enoch
chose to walk with God.
So when he was threatened,
he looked to Jehovah for security.
On the other hand, Lamech,
a descendant of the murderer Cain,
opted to provide his own security.
This led to killing a man
in supposed self-defense.
Now, Enoch and the killer Lamech
both lived in a violent world,
but their violence-reaction plans
were totally different.
As we descend deeper into the last days,
people will become more desperate
and violence will only escalate.
In the following dramatization,
let’s see how reacting to violence
could suddenly become
a personal test of faith in Jehovah.
My son barely escaped the gangs
—again.
We’re the only ones without a gun.
I don’t want to keep a gun for protection.
But how else can I protect my family?
In today’s violent society,
even in the perceived safest
of neighborhoods,
we could have a similar experience.
If so, how can we imitate Enoch’s faith?
For one thing, he recognized
a simple but fundamental truth:
Jehovah hates violence.
So for us to walk with God as Enoch did,
we must reject violence as an option.
What can help us to do that?
Don’t harbor retaliatory thoughts.
Violent thoughts can lead to violent actions,
without thinking about the consequences.
Learn to recognize situations
that could harm us;
then act to avoid the danger.
That’s the counsel given at Proverbs 22:3:
“The shrewd one sees the danger
and conceals himself,
but the inexperienced keep right on going
and suffer the consequences.”
So we’re encouraged to conceal ourselves
if we sense danger.
Think ahead, look around, be perceptive,
and avoid situations that may become violent.
Avoid violent entertainment.
Why?
It frequently portrays a violent response
when a character’s safety is threatened.
All sorts of objects or weapons
are depicted as strategies
to kill or overpower the opponents.
While Christians may take reasonable steps
to ensure their personal security,
they do so within the framework
of Bible principles.
Consider these three scriptures
as you make decisions
about your family’s security needs.
David prayed at Psalm 51:14:
“Save me from bloodguilt.”
He never wanted to be guilty of murder.
Preparing a response
that includes the use of weapons
could result in taking a life.
If a Christian takes reasonable steps
to defend himself or his property,
he would do everything in his power
to avoid taking a human life
and become bloodguilty.
At Matthew 26:52, Jesus warned
that ‘those who draw the sword
shall die by the sword.’
It’s well-established
that when weapons are displayed,
situations usually escalate
with tragic outcomes.
Planning to use a deadly weapon
could effectively dismiss Jehovah’s spirit
from our presence.
To pull away from Jehovah
is the last thing we want to do
in a dangerous situation.
A third is found at Ecclesiastes 9:18,
where it simply says:
“Wisdom is better than weapons.”
In other words, being armed
cannot match wisdom.
The prudent course is to trust in Jehovah,
not weapons.
God’s Word wisely teaches us
to daily show respect, consideration,
and genuine kindness to others.
This approach of pursuing peace
will often minimize
otherwise potential conflicts.
Isn’t it true, violent struggles often begin
with a heated exchange of words?
So calmness can often defuse anger
and deflect violent conflicts.
Here’s something else to consider.
The Bible book of Jude
says that Enoch prophesied to his opposers.
This means that he was a preacher.
Being known
as a courageous Witness of Jehovah
and showing compassion
for those to whom we preach
is always our best protection.
How was Enoch rewarded
for putting his faith in Jehovah?
Note the answer at Hebrews 11:5:
“By faith Enoch was transferred
so as not to see death,
“and he was nowhere to be found
because God had transferred him;
“for before he was transferred
he received the witness
that he had pleased God well.”
Enoch was rewarded with the knowledge
that “he had pleased God well.”
In some manner, in a very clear way,
he was given assurance of Jehovah’s approval.
How comforting to know
that if we face dangerous encounters
with no good way out,
like Enoch, we too can handle
that test of faith
in a way that will please God well!
In the following dramatization,
note how our brother
imitates Enoch’s example.
Hebrews 11:1:
“Faith is the assured expectation
of what is hoped for.”
I do have faith in God’s promises,
but if a gun is what I need
to protect my family,
won’t Jehovah understand?
No, I couldn’t do that.
I’m not the first to face a violent world.
Hebrews 11:5:
“. . . received the witness
that he had pleased God well.”
Enoch lived among extreme violence,
but he walked with God.
I can imitate his faith.
Did you notice
this brother’s violence-reaction plan?
His faith in God’s promises helped him
to look to Jehovah for security
instead of a gun.
He realized he was not the first
to face a violent world
and made the firm decision
to imitate the faith of Enoch.
So now, prior to a violent confrontation,
what can we do to be sure our reaction plan
will be pleasing to Jehovah?
Imitate Enoch in these four ways.
Build our faith and confidence in Jehovah now
before we are tested in a violent situation.
Reject violent thoughts.
Don’t allow the violent movies
or violent video games
that are sponsored by the Devil
to train your children or yourselves
on how to react in a violent confrontation.
Reject the idea that you will prepare
yourselves with weapons.
And fearlessly keep preaching
as Enoch did.
In this way, even if we find ourselves
in a violent situation,
our violence-reaction plan
will allow us to imitate Enoch
and please God well.
Brother John Ekrann,
a helper to the Coordinators’ Committee,
will now consider the next talk
of this symposium,
“Imitate the Faithful, Not the Faithless
—Noah, Not His Neighbors.”
Jesus compared our days
with the days of Noah.
Jesus would know because he was in heaven
and watched the days of Noah
go from bad to worse.
Well, how bad were the days of Noah?
Let’s look at Genesis 6:5 for a description:
“Consequently, Jehovah saw
“that man’s wickedness was great on the earth
“and that every inclination of the thoughts
of his heart was only bad all the time.”
The wickedness on the earth was made worse
by wicked angels
that abandoned their role in heaven
and materialized
into human bodies to marry women on earth.
These unholy marriages produced sons
that were giants called Nephilim.
Now, parents, we could ask,
Can you imagine what it must have been like
for Noah and his wife
to raise a family in that ungodly world?
But you don’t really need
to imagine it, do you?
Just one look around us and we can all see
that we live in a world
that fits the same description,
if not worse, than the days of Noah.
Just as Noah’s faith was tested,
your faith will likely be tested too
as you raise a family in this ungodly world.
Please do not allow the pressures at work,
from relatives, or from others
make you think that material things
are more important
than your family’s relationship with Jehovah.
You can remain faithful
by imitating Noah, not his neighbors.
In the following dramatization,
note how a parent’s faith is tested.
Another busy day:
My daughter is going to preach,
I’m off to work,
and it’s Family Worship night.
Bye, Dad.
Have a good day, Sweetie.
All right, listen up!
I’ve got an announcement for everybody.
Starting this Monday . . .
What?
More required overtime?
OK, that’s it.
That’s all I’ve got.
Let’s get back to work!
It’s extra money.
But how can I do it and  take care of Regina?
. . . to your local channel 17,
where news comes first.
Dad, isn’t it Family Worship night?
. . . to affect millions
as economies are . . .
Maybe a little later, Sweetie.
. . . the worst financial crisis in decades.
Violence and looting continue . . .
I wanted to, but I was spent
—again.
Our brother knew it was Family Worship night,
but extra work and the pressures of life
were dragging him down.
His faith was being tested.
Would he imitate Noah or his neighbors?
Noah’s neighbors lacked faith.
They did not do what was needed
to save their families.
Instead, Jesus said they were so distracted
by their daily lives, “eating and drinking”
and getting married
that “they took no note
until the Flood came
and [took] them all away.”
In contrast, Noah took note.
Noah acted in faith to save his household.
Look at the beautiful description
of Noah’s faith
in Hebrews 11:7:
“By faith Noah,
after receiving divine warning
“of things not yet seen, showed godly fear
“and constructed an ark
for the saving of his household;
“and through this faith
he condemned the world,
“and he became an heir of the righteousness
that results from faith.”
Noah’s actions saved his household.
We can be sure it was not always easy
for Noah to explain to his sons
why they were building an ark
and no one else was
or why building it was more important
than anything else they had to do.
His three boys would have seen the Nephilim.
Noah and his wife
could hardly have shielded their boys
from all the stories
that circulated about those giants.
Imagine some of the discussions
that Noah and his wife had with their boys.
The materialized wicked angels
and their Nephilim sons
were men of fame and admired by everyone
for their superhuman capabilities.
Even today, people
are fascinated with stories
and movies of humans with superpowers.
But those wicked angels
and their sons, the Nephilim,
were nothing to be admired or imitated.
Noah taught his sons
not to admire or copy them.
They had to help their boys see
that Jehovah felt hurt by the violence
and rebellion in the world.
The boys needed to learn
to love Jehovah and imitate him.
Parents, take the time to teach your children
to hate what Jehovah hates
and to love what Jehovah loves.
Jehovah hates liars, cheaters,
bullies, selfishness, and greed.
On the other hand, Jehovah loves honesty,
peace, love, sharing, and self-control.
Noah, like any good father,
wanted to make sure his family
had a comfortable place to live
and good food to eat.
Think of the houses that Noah and his sons
could have built for themselves.
They certainly had
the construction experience.
But that was not Noah’s focus.
Noah’s life had more meaning and purpose
than building houses, eating, and drinking.
Noah taught by example and kept his focus
on saving his household
from the coming Flood.
He likely had times
when he felt tired or overwhelmed
with the sheer size
and scope of building an ark.
However, Noah
did not allow his day-to-day life
to crowd out his service to Jehovah.
He made sure that no matter what else
was happening in his life,
the work of building the ark
kept moving forward.
Our brother we saw in the video
—he was tired and overwhelmed
by his work and job.
All of us can identify with how he feels.
Life in this system is hard.
We appreciate the hard work and effort
that you parents are making
to keep a good spiritual routine
for your family.
We know how tempting it can be to say:
“Well, we’ll study later”
or “We’ll pick it up again next week.”
See the danger.
Putting off our spiritual routine this week
can easily lead to three weeks
and then six weeks and then not at all.
Jehovah took care
of Noah and his family’s material needs,
so you can be confident that Jehovah
will take care of you and your family.
He will bless you for your obedience.
In the following dramatization,
note how our brother imitates Noah’s faith.
Violence and looting continue
despite curfews . . .
The world is such a mess.
It’s everything Jesus said it would be.
She’s so good
—spiritually-minded like her mother was.
Can I expect she’ll stay that way on her own?
. . . rise in the wake
of a massive earthquake
with a magnitude of 8.1, which struck . . .
Leaders from around the world
have come together
and made notable statements
on social media today
expressing confidence.
One leader posted:
“Finally, we are seeing global coordination
“that gives us a hope of a secure future.
We have a unique opportunity
to end armed conflict.”
. . . unrest sweeping across the country.
Sadly, our community has been affected
by a soar in gun violence.
As of right now, . . .
If it is just like Noah’s day,
I need to show faith like he did.
. . . are dead,
including a 17-year-old teenager.
Let’s do our family worship.
OK.
I need to show faith in Jehovah
and work hard to save my family.
Did you notice
how our brother acted in faith?
Our brother imagined
what could happen to his daughter
if she lost her spirituality
and adopted the lifestyle of the world.
What he saw really scared him.
He immediately turned off the TV
and joined his daughter for family worship.
Noah knew that building the ark
would save his family from the coming Flood
—but only if they were in the ark with him.
He did not want to see his sons
adopt the lifestyle of his neighbors.
Noah did everything he could to make sure
that he taught his sons to love Jehovah
by his words and his actions.
Parents, by imitating Noah,
you can save both yourself and your family.
Brother Seth Hyatt,
a helper with the Service Committee,
will now consider
the next talk of this symposium,
“Imitate the Faithful,
Not the Faithless—Moses, Not Pharaoh.”
For almost 40 years,
Moses enjoyed a life of comfort and privilege
as the adopted son of Pharaoh’s daughter.
Among the advantages were material prosperity
and advanced education.
How might those advantages
have affected Moses’ outlook?
We gain some insight
from an incident that took place
when Moses was 80 years of age.
It’s recorded in Exodus chapter 5.
There, in a conversation with the Pharaoh,
the Pharaoh is reported
to have said to Moses:
“Who is Jehovah,
that I should obey his voice . . . ?
I do not know Jehovah at all.”
No truer words have ever been spoken
that Pharaoh did not know Jehovah
and, as a result, had no faith in him.
He was faithless.
His haughty words,
dismissive of Jehovah,
no doubt reflected the Egyptian belief
that the Pharaoh was himself a god.
Was Moses’ outlook
affected in a negative way
by that Egyptian culture?
No.
We see a refreshing contrast.
Moses was a humble man,
a man of faith who, at the age of 40,
made a decision that reflected
the depth of that faith
and that changed his life forever.
Now, why should you and I
be interested in Moses’ example of faith?
Because like Moses,
we face situations that require choices
—decisions that reflect
the quality of our faith.
For example, note how an elder
faces a test of his faith
in the following dramatization.
Danny is going to look after the business
while we’re away.
I only scheduled a few small jobs.
I’m sure he can handle it.
It’s our assigned convention,
and I planned as best I could
for us to go together.
But some things
you just can’t see coming.
Hello.
Danny was in a panic.
He got trouble calls
from my two biggest accounts.
It was bad.
I can’t lose their business.
For just a few minutes,
let’s consider what the Scriptures
have to say about Moses’ faith
and consider four ways
that we can imitate him.
Turn, please, to Hebrews chapter 11,
and we’re going to begin reading in verse 24
—Hebrews 11:24:
“By faith Moses, when grown up,
“refused to be called
the son of Pharaoh’s daughter,
“choosing to be
mistreated with the people of God
rather than to have
the temporary enjoyment of sin.”
So the first thing that Moses did?
He rejected the proud,
selfish thinking of that Egyptian world.
He chose to be mistreated
with the Israelites who were slaves
rather than to align himself with a culture
that dismissed Jehovah.
What prompted that decision?
The opening words of verse 24 tell us
that Moses was a man of faith,
and his faith shaped his decisions
—not his culture, not community pressure—
his faith.
And that’s our second point.
Now let’s continue reading in verse 26:
“Because he considered
the reproach of the Christ
“to be riches greater
than the treasures of Egypt,
for he looked intently
toward the payment of the reward.”
Moses received an assignment,
a commission, from Jehovah,
and he viewed
that commission as more valuable
than anything that Egypt had to offer.
He turned his back on the comforts of Egypt
and aligned himself with Jehovah
and the outworking of Jehovah’s purpose.
Our third point:
He had clear spiritual vision.
“He looked intently
toward the payment of the reward.”
Moses could see outside the “Egypt box,”
and he could see the fulfillment
of Jehovah’s wonderful promises
to Abraham and Abraham’s descendants.
The spiritual vision
is commented on further in verse 27:
“By faith he left Egypt,
“but not fearing the anger of the king,
“for he continued steadfast
as seeing the One who is invisible.”
Yes, Moses could see the Pharaoh,
but with his clear spiritual vision,
he could see Jehovah.
Moses had an unbreakable friendship
with Jehovah,
and so can you.
The quality of any friendship can be measured
by the quality of communication
that characterizes it.
Regular heartfelt prayer
and meaningful study of the Bible
constitute two-way communication
between an individual and Jehovah.
As we get to know Jehovah better and better
and as our faith strengthens and deepens,
then our decisions reflect that faith.
And in our words and actions,
we give evidence of that faith.
And that brings us to the fourth point:
In the opening words of verse 27:
“By faith [Moses] left Egypt.”
His faith was of such quality
that it was evidenced
in his words and his actions.
True, Moses was a man of action
—he left Egypt.
But he was also a man
who expressed his convictions.
When Moses and the Israelites
stood on the shore of the Red Sea
with Pharaoh
and his armies behind them
and the Red Sea in front of them
and seemingly nowhere to go,
how did Moses strengthen the people?
“Do not be afraid.
Stand [still] and see
the salvation of Jehovah.”
Those words must have
strengthened the Israelites.
In a similar way,
we can strengthen those around us,
whether in the preaching work, in our
dealings with our family, or with others.
When our faith is voiced
and evidenced
in the things that we say and do,
we’re a blessing to those around us.
Of course, it’s important
that we stay humble as Moses did
—ever receptive
to Jehovah’s direction and counsel
that he provides
through his Word and his organization.
Now, how about that elder who we met earlier.
Let’s look in and see how he imitates Moses
in making a decision.
OK, just find the parts,
and I’ll call you back.
This will take all weekend.
You want us to go?
Will you get the program later?
Yeah, and I’ll have to text John
that I can’t be an attendant.
But what will I miss that I can’t get later?
At Hebrews 11:26 it says
Moses “considered the reproach of the Christ
“to be riches greater
than the treasure of Egypt,
for he looked intently
toward the payment of the reward.”
Of what value is being a prince of Egypt
compared with being . . .
Honey?
Honey, what do you think?
Danny?
Yeah.
Here’s what I want you to do for now,
and we’ll pick up the pieces when I get back.
Did you notice how the elder
made a decision based on his faith?
With his eyes of faith,
he could see the blessings
that he and his family would enjoy
if they attended the convention together,
and he made a decision as a spiritual man.
In a similar way, if we imitate Moses
by rejecting the proud,
selfish thinking of the world
and allowing our decisions
to be shaped by our faith
and not by culture or community pressure,
if we maintain clear spiritual vision,
and if our faith is evidenced
in our words and actions,
then we can be confident of Jehovah’s support
and his hand of salvation in our behalf,
just as he did for Moses.
Brother Robert Ciranko,
a helper to the Writing Committee,
will consider
the final talk of this symposium,
“Imitate the Faithful, Not the Faithless
—Jesus’ Disciples, Not the Pharisees.”
Jesus called them
“serpents, offspring of vipers.”
Who is he talking about?
The Pharisees.
And who were they?
A prominent, Jewish religious sect
in the first century.
Why was Jesus so critical of them?
Because even though
those religious leaders had knowledge of God
and prided themselves on their
strict adherence to the Law of Moses,
they did not do as Moses had said
—to listen to the future Savior
that Jehovah would raise up for his people.
That Savior is Jesus Christ.
But when the Pharisees saw him
miraculously curing the sick, lame, and blind
—even resurrecting the dead—
they did not rejoice over that
and glorify God for what he
was performing through Christ.
The Pharisees were faithless,
and they refused to believe in
and listen to God’s Son.
Instead, they persecuted Jesus’ disciples
because they did put faith in the Christ.
So Jesus exposed the Pharisees
for what they were and called them “serpents”
because of the deadly spiritual harm
that they inflicted on others
who were influenced by them.
In fact, the Pharisees
exerted such great influence over the people
that prominent persons
were afraid to openly confess
their faith in Jesus
for fear of being expelled
from their positions in the synagogue
and losing face in the community.
Can the same sort of fear
hold people back today from serving Jehovah
as a disciple of God’s Son,
fearing the rejection or ridicule
that they might have to endure
from neighbors, friends, or family?
In the following dramatization,
note how a Bible student’s faith is tested
as he thinks about whether
he could start sharing in the ministry
and become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
I love my Bible study.
It’s changed my life,
and I really want to start in the ministry.
Good morning.
In my town,
everybody knows you
and what you do.
I’m not ashamed of the good news.
But what if I become a Witness?
The family business has two employees
—Dad and me.
Hey, Dad.
Hey, Nelson.
Did they leave yet?
Yeah, they uh—
They actually just left.
Look, Son, going to meetings is one thing,
but if you’re out there preaching,
we’ll both be out of work.
Nelson.
Nelson!
Can you see how Nelson’s faith
was being tested?
He had to decide whether to be more concerned
with what other humans thought of him
or doing all that he could
to secure Jehovah’s approval.
Is your faith being tested like Nelson’s?
If it is, how can you
imitate Jesus’ disciples?
They not only knew about God
but they trusted in him
as their reliable Father and Friend.
As proof of that, they went right
onto the temple grounds in Jerusalem
in full view of everyone
and gave a bold witness about God’s Son.
They were powerful by their faith.
When the Jewish high court
—many members of which were Pharisees—
heard about this, they were furious.
They ordered the disciples
to stop teaching about Jesus.
What did they do?
Cower in fear?
No.
We can read what happened at Acts 5:29
—that’s Acts 5:29.
It reports:
“In answer Peter
and the other apostles said:
‘We must obey God as ruler rather than men.’”
Jesus’ disciples did not allow
the religious leaders’ pressure
and threats to deter them.
They knew their priorities
and that situations would arise
when a Christian cannot obey
both men and Jehovah God.
You see, human rulers forfeit
their right to our obedience
when they demand what Almighty God prohibits
or, as in this case,
when they prohibit what God requires of us.
Even if they ban our preaching work,
we cannot stop carrying out
our God-given assignment
to preach the good news.
So at that very moment,
the apostles set a precedent
for all true Christians throughout the ages
—to obey God as Ruler first.
The disciples’ faith made them
real friends of Jehovah.
As a result, today they are alive
and well in heaven with Jesus
to serve with him as kings and priests.
What of those faithless Pharisees
and their coveted prominence?
Jesus told them to their face
what fate lay ahead of them
as recorded at Matthew chapter 23
verse 33.
At Matthew 23:33,
he told them: “Serpents, offspring of vipers,
how will you flee
from the judgment of Gehenna?”
Now, “the judgment of Gehenna”
meant that if they did not change,
they would be everlastingly destroyed.
If we are going
to imitate the disciples’ faith,
we must do as Jesus urged his followers.
See what he said at Matthew 6:33
—Matthew 6:33:
“Keep on, then, seeking first
the Kingdom and his righteousness,
and all these other things
will be added to you.”
So Jesus’ disciples must always make
the Kingdom their first concern in life.
If we do that, then, as Jesus promised,
Jehovah will see to it
that we have the material
and spiritual necessities of life.
Now, ‘seeking the Kingdom’ first
in our life includes
‘preaching the good news of the Kingdom’
to as many people as we can.
As with Jesus’ disciples,
it requires courage and boldness
to preach when neighbors,
friends, or family oppose us.
But we do not need to fear them
or any other religious enemies
because Jesus taught his disciples
how to preach boldly but discreetly.
You can see this at Matthew chapter 10
and verse 16.
At Matthew 10:16,
he said: “Look! I am sending you out
as sheep among wolves;
“so prove yourselves cautious as serpents
and yet innocent as doves.”
It seems that most literal snakes
would rather flee than attack.
So to be cautious, here, means to be prudent,
sensible, shrewd.
Now, the dove is known
as “the sheep of the bird world”
because of its gentle appearance
and disposition.
So to be innocent means being blameless,
or genuine, with pure motives.
Jesus’ point was that when
his sheeplike disciples face persecution,
they need to combine
the characteristics of being cautious
and innocent to avoid possible dangers
as they carry out their preaching work.
For example,
suppose colleagues at work, schoolmates,
or even members
of your own family make caustic remarks
about your beliefs as a Witness of Jehovah.
Instead of responding in kind
by being equally sarcastic about their faith,
show them that their comments have no effect
on your peace and your pleasant demeanor.
That’s being prudent and blameless,
cautious yet innocent.
Let’s watch the rest of the dramatization
that we saw earlier.
Nelson had just heard
his dad tell him over the phone,
“Going to meetings is one thing,
but if you’re out there preaching,
we’ll both be out of work.”
Let’s see if Nelson will imitate
the faith of Jesus’ disciples.
Is Dad right?
We’d be ruined if I became a Witness?
But what would happen if I don’t?
Hi, Nelson.
Hey, good morning.
Hey, good morning, Keith.
What are you doing here?
Listen, nobody wants to talk to you people.
Rob and Nick live in the same town
with the same pressures,
but they preach
and support their families.
Their joy is real.
Do I really want fear of man to stop me
from becoming Jesus’ disciple?
John 3:36 says:
“The one who exercises faith in the Son
has everlasting life.”
It’s time to exercise my faith
and let Jehovah do the rest.
Remember the question
that Nelson asked himself,
“Do I really want fear of man to stop me
from becoming Jesus’ disciple?”
He answered that by saying,
“It’s time to exercise my faith
and let Jehovah do the rest.”
So he happily began demonstrating
his faith in Jehovah
by sharing in the Christian ministry.
Just like him, we all need to keep imitating
the faith of Jesus’ disciples.
Well, what have we learned
from this symposium?
Two things.
First, we must reject
the course of faithless ones
like Cain, Lamech,
Noah’s neighbors, Pharaoh, and the Pharisees.
Second, we need
to imitate Jehovah’s faithful servants
like Abel, Enoch, Noah,
Moses, and Jesus’ disciples.
If we do, then we can enjoy living forever
as a friend of Jehovah.
Thank you, brothers!
We are determined to imitate
the good examples that you discussed,
especially when our faith is tested.
We now come to the final talk
of today’s program.
Why do we regularly need to examine
our lives and our worship?
In what ways should we do so?
Brother Geoffrey Jackson
of the Governing Body
will direct us to the Bible’s answer.
His theme is
“‘Keep Testing Whether You Are in the Faith’
—How?”
Do you own a car or a motorbike
or some other type of vehicle?
If you do, you realize that it brings with it
a serious responsibility.
Initially, it costs quite a bit of money
to buy a vehicle,
but also you need to keep on spending money
to keep it running.
In addition to that,
there is another serious responsibility
that comes with owning a vehicle.
And that is the responsibility
to maintain it safely
so that it doesn’t break down,
doesn’t cause accidents
and, most important,
doesn’t cause loss of life.
Of course, if you have a maintenance program,
you’re not just going to wait
for something to fall off the vehicle
or perhaps for it just to stop.
But, rather, ahead of time,
you have to have a checklist
to see that everything is working properly.
Well, in a similar way, spiritually speaking,
each one of us needs a maintenance program
with regard to our spirituality.
What sort of maintenance program
are we talking about?
Well, let’s take our Bibles, please,
and turn to the second book of Corinthians
chapter 13 and verse 5,
2 Corinthians 13:5;
there it says:
“Keep testing whether you are in the faith;
“keep proving what you yourselves are.
“Or do you not recognize
that Jesus Christ is in union with you?
Unless you are disapproved.”
So notice right in the beginning
of that verse, it says
to “keep testing” and “keep proving.”
What does that really mean?
Well, if you look at the study note
associated with verse 5,
it tells us this:
“One lexicon states that the word
Paul here uses for ‘testing’
“means ‘to endeavor to discover
“the nature or character of someth[ing].’
“They could discover the nature
of their own spiritual standing
“by comparing their daily conduct,
attitudes, and decisions
“with the sacred truths they were taught.
“Doing such testing would help them
“to keep proving
that they were true Christians.
“For ‘proving,’ Paul uses a word
“that could refer to testing
whether something is genuine,
as one might test metals.”
Do we see the point
of what this verse tells us?
As Christians,
we need to ‘keep testing continually
that we’re in the faith.’
But now, what does this word “faith” mean
in this context?
It’s not just referring
to the quality of faith
but, rather, it involves
all the Christian teachings
that we find in God’s Word, the Bible.
So having that in mind,
“keep testing” and “keep proving” really mean
that we need to look at ourselves
and see if we’re really living up
to what the Bible tells us to do.
Now, that’s a very serious
maintenance program.
But just as we do a maintenance program
for a vehicle
and we might have a checklist,
is there a checklist that we can use
when we’re testing and proving
that we’re in the faith?
Yes, there is.
We can say there are three things.
First of all, we need to ask
heart-searching questions
about our relationship with Jehovah.
That’s the first point:
Ask the questions
that will search through our heart.
Second, we have to answer honestly.
Yes, whatever we see
as an answer to those questions,
then we need to have a correct answer.
And then, finally,
we need to seek Jehovah’s help
in making whatever adjustments
we need to make
so that we can maintain our spirituality
strong and in good standing
so that our relationship
with Jehovah is good.
So with that in mind, let’s go back
to the illustration we started with
—a vehicle, a car, or a motorbike.
If you were to compare
our Christian faith or our beliefs
or our conduct
to a vehicle and the need to maintain it,
what sort of things would you make
as a comparison?
Well, perhaps the first thing
we might think about is the engine.
You certainly need to make sure
the engine works correctly
because that’s what gives the vehicle
the power to keep moving.
So it’s good for us to ask the question,
What is it that moves us or motivates us
so that we serve Jehovah acceptably?
Well, the answer is found in the Scriptures.
And if we turn together
to the first book of Timothy
chapter 4 and verse 8
—that’s 1 Timothy 4:8—
see if you can discern
what it is that we could liken
to the engine in a car.
It tells us:
“For physical training
is beneficial for a little,
“but godly devotion
is beneficial for all things,
“as it holds promise of the life now
and the life that is to come.”
Did you see what the scripture tells us
is so important?
Godly devotion.
But we need to understand
what godly devotion is.
In fact, we also need to appreciate
this beautiful expression
in the New World Translation.
Many other Bibles just simply translate this
as “godliness”—“godliness is beneficial.”
Or perhaps they say “godly training”
or “being religious,”
or even one version says “mental training.”
But the New World Translation  captures
the meaning of the original word here,
because you can train, or program, a robot
to do a certain job,
but you can’t program it
to have godly devotion.
Why not?
Because godly devotion involves
how we feel about Jehovah.
It means our loyalty to him
based on a heart
full of love and appreciation.
So when it says godly devotion is important,
it really involves why  we do things,
not just what  we do.
Well, let’s think back
to our illustration of the vehicle.
You want to test the engine.
What would you do to check the engine
to see if it’s OK?
Well, one thing you might do
is keep an eye on the temperature gauge,
because if the engine is overheating,
you know there’s a problem.
Or perhaps you might check the oil
to see if there’s enough oil.
Or you may check to see
if you’ve changed the oil regularly enough.
Or when the engine is idling,
you might listen carefully to it
to see if it’s running smoothly or roughly
and, of course, you’d be interested
if there are any strange sounds or noises.
So that’s the type of thing
you would have on a checklist
when you’re trying to see
if an engine is working properly.
Now, none of that applies
to godly devotion, does it?
But what could be on our checklist
for us to test godly devotion
to see if it’s healthy and strong or not?
Well, again, the Bible helps us.
If you turn with me
this time to the book of Psalms,
let’s look at Psalm 40:8
—that’s Psalm 40:8.
Here it tells us:
“To do your will, O my God,
“is my delight,
and your law is deep within me.”
Now, this is a test of our godly devotion.
How so?
Well, we need to ask ourselves:
‘Is my service to God
something that I really delight in,
‘or is it simply a chore?
‘Is it something that I do as a mere routine
‘—something that I just
keep on doing regularly
but don’t really have
a strong desire to accomplish?’
Well, if we were thinking
that our godly devotion
was not so good, not so strong,
and perhaps we were just doing things
out of routine
rather than for our love for Jehovah,
we need to take action,
just the same as if we heard
that the engine had a knocking sound
or if we saw that it was overheating.
And that’s exactly
what Jesus told the brothers
back in the first century
in the congregation in Ephesus.
Please turn with me
to the book of Revelation,
Revelation chapter 2.
And you’ll remember that this section
of the book of Revelation
has a series of messages
that Jesus gives to different congregations.
Now, the first congregation mentioned
is in Ephesus.
If you look at chapter 2 of Revelation
and if we glance through verses 2 and 3,
what do you notice?
Well, Jesus says to the brothers:
“I know your deeds,
and your labor and endurance.”
That sounds good, doesn’t it?
Then he goes on to say
that they didn’t “tolerate bad men.”
And then in verse 3,
he mentions that they “persevered”
and that they “[had] not grown weary.”
So, what do we assume from these two verses?
That our brothers back then
in the first century
in the congregation in Ephesus
were busy doing the work of Jehovah.
Yes, they were active.
They weren’t giving up.
But then what does Jesus say in verse 4?
“Nevertheless, I hold this against you,
that you have left the love
you had at first.”
Do we see the point?
Clearly, it shows us that Jehovah and Jesus
are not just interested in what  we do
but also why  we do it.
Yes, they want us to serve our God, Jehovah,
in a way that shows that we love him
and that we’re loyal to him,
just the same as Jesus loves his Father
and is loyal to him.
And this is so important!
The apostle Paul highlighted this.
If you turn with me, please,
to 1 Corinthians chapter 13,
1 Corinthians chapter 13,
and notice what Paul says under inspiration
in verse 3:
“And if I give all my belongings
to feed others,
“and if I hand over my body
so that I may boast,
“but [I] do not have love,
I do not benefit at all.”
Now, if we look across
at the study note on this verse,
notice that it says:
“Speaking hypothetically,
“Paul says that if instead of love,
“such pride were his motive,
“he would give everything he owned
to feed others
“or would even die a martyr’s death
as a witness to the truth,
but he would not benefit at all.”
Isn’t that food for thought?
So thinking about this expression,
“godly devotion,”
it’s interesting that one Bible scholar
defined the original word this way:
He said that it is
“a very practical awareness of God
in every aspect of life.”
So if we were to check our godly devotion
and we see
that perhaps it’s not really working
as well as it should,
maybe it needs maintenance.
What sort of maintenance would we give it?
Well, surely we would need
to think of Jehovah
more often every day
to see him as part of our life.
Also, meditating on what Jehovah
has done for us
builds up appreciation and love for him,
and that motivates us
to do what Jehovah wants us to do
out of love,
yes, a heart full of appreciation.
And, of course, offering prayers regularly
to Jehovah
helps to strengthen that relationship.
So, what have we learned so far
in our discussion?
Well, just like the engine of a vehicle
needs to be maintained,
we need to be aware
of whether or not it’s operating correctly.
In a similar way, we need to ask ourselves
honest questions
—questions that search our hearts
with regard to our godly devotion:
‘Is our service to Jehovah
‘based simply on routine and a sense of duty?
‘Do we view it just as a chore,
‘or does our heart show
that it’s filled with appreciation and love
for Jehovah?’
Well, if we build up that appreciation
—that love—
we can be sure
that our godly devotion is good.
Yes, it’s well maintained.
So that’s the first point of comparison
that we’d like to make
in the maintenance schedule for a vehicle
and for our spirituality.
So let’s think of another comparison.
Another very important part of any vehicle
is the brakes.
Now, when we think of the brakes,
they’re absolutely necessary
—aren’t they?—
because someone could jump
in front of your vehicle.
There could be someone
who perhaps is coming too quickly,
and you have to avoid them,
and you need to use those brakes.
So, what do you think
we could compare the brakes to
with regard to our service to Jehovah
and our relationship with him?
Well, the Bible gives us a clue.
As we read Psalm 111,
we’ll see the answer to that question.
So as we turn there to Psalm 111,
let’s see what verse 10 tells us:
“The fear of Jehovah
is the beginning of wisdom.
“All those observing his orders
show good insight.
His praise endures forever.”
So do you see what could be likened
to the brakes of a vehicle?
What is it that stops us
from doing something
that displeases Jehovah?
It’s our fear of Jehovah.
So just as you need to maintain
the brakes in a vehicle,
we also need to make sure
that our love for Jehovah
and our fear of Jehovah
is strong and well maintained.
Now, of course, we need to think:
‘What do we mean by fear of Jehovah?
‘Do we mean shaking all the time,
worried that he’s going to do
something wrong to us?’
No.
Perhaps we could liken it to a chef
who has a razor-sharp knife.
Now, this knife, when used properly,
can help him to attain
all sorts of wonderful things.
But if he misuses it, then he has a problem.
So, in a similar way, if our relationship
is strong with Jehovah,
there’s no need for us
to be shaking in our boots, as it were.
But, rather, we need to remember always
that Jehovah is with us.
And so a healthy fear of Jehovah
means that we don’t want
to displease him in any way.
So a fear of Jehovah helps us
so that as we’re moving along,
if anything comes our way,
we’re ready to stop
if we shouldn’t engage in that activity.
So let’s think for a few moments
about the maintenance check for the brakes.
What would you do?
How would you check
if the brakes are OK or not?
Well, mechanics tell us
that if you’re applying pressure
to the brakes
and you find the steering wheel
is starting to shake,
that’s a sign that maybe they need attention.
Or if you apply pressure to the brakes
and the vehicle starts to veer off
to one side,
again, it’s not a good sign.
Or as you press the brake pedal,
if you find there’s very little resistance
and you have to start pumping it,
again, that’s a problem.
And, of course, like with the engine,
if you start to hear
strange, grinding noises,
that is never a good sign, is it?
Well, what about our fear of Jehovah?
How can we test whether or not
our fear of Jehovah is at the right level?
Well, we know that Satan and his world
constantly throw things at us:
temptations, wrong thinking, and so on.
So it’s just like when you’re driving
in a vehicle
and someone jumps out in front of you
or an animal runs across the road
—that’s when we need those brakes.
But how do we apply them?
How does our godly fear help us?
Well, let’s turn to the book of 2 Corinthians
and see a very interesting point
that is mentioned to the brothers
back there in Corinth.
So 2 Corinthians chapter 10
and we’re going to look at verse 5.
Now, the context of this chapter
is where Paul is talking
about wrong teachings.
But the principle as outlined in this verse
can be applied also to our reaction
to wrong thoughts and immoral thoughts
or all sorts of things
that are not in harmony with Jehovah’s will.
So let’s see if we can see
what the principle is,
2 Corinthians 10:5:
“For we are overturning reasonings
“and every lofty thing raised up
against the knowledge of God,
“and we are bringing every thought
into captivity
to make it obedient to the Christ.”
So do we see the point?
No matter what sort of thought it is
—if it’s an immoral thought,
a temptation to do something wrong,
something that’s not neutral
with regard to the political situation—
what does it say here?
We have to react quickly.
It’s just as if we put on the brakes.
Yes, we have to overturn
all these sort of things
that could be going on in our mind.
So, obviously, it’s important for us
to test our godly fear
in the sense of thinking:
‘How do I normally react
‘if I’m faced with a situation
that perhaps tempts me?
‘Am I quick to react?
‘Do the brakes work properly,
or is my godly fear compromised?’
—an interesting question.
Also, another illustration:
Just imagine that in your car
you find a whole lot of poisonous spiders.
Well, that’s not good, is it?
Of course, you’d get someone
to help you get rid of those spiders.
Now, after you’ve paid that person
to do the job,
how would you feel if they said:
“Well, we got most of them.
There could be one or two left”?
I don’t think you’d be very happy
—would you?—
because you want
all of those poisonous spiders
out of the car.
But what does it tell us here in verse 5?
It says that we have to get
all the things that are out of harmony
with Jehovah
under control.
Yes, we could find that even though
most of the things are under control,
there could be just a few areas
where we haven’t gotten them under control.
It could even be that it’s
as if we’re going in the wrong direction.
Well, what do you need to do if you find out
you’re driving on the highway
in the wrong direction?
Stop, turn around,
and go the opposite direction.
So isn’t that exactly what we should do
when it comes to this matter
of checking our godly fear?
Yes, if we see that in any way
we’re a little slow in reacting
when immoral temptations come our way
or other wrong thinking,
then we need to strengthen
our fear of Jehovah.
Yes, our fear of Jehovah
helps us to resist these things.
Now, what’s something that can help
to strengthen our fear of Jehovah?
Well, again, the Bible
gives us an indication.
This time, we find it
in the book of Proverbs,
Proverbs 8:13.
And you’ll notice that this is
a little definition, or formula, for us.
Proverbs 8:13:
“The fear of Jehovah
means the hating of bad.”
So, what is it that can help us
strengthen our fear of Jehovah?
We need to hate what is bad.
Now, for a moment,
let me ask you this question:
Is there some type of food
that you really hate?
I know I can think of a couple of things
that I just really can’t eat,
and I hate them.
If someone tries to tempt you
to eat that food,
are you going to give in easily?
Of course not, because you hate
that type of food.
Well, how much more important it is for us
to develop within ourselves a hatred
for what is bad.
Yes, we have to make sure
that when we see things that Jehovah hates,
that we feel the same way
—that we don’t accept them.
Never would we allow gradualism
to change our feelings
with regard to what Jehovah says is wrong.
Now, as we read on,
looking back at Proverbs 8:13,
notice it says: “The fear of Jehovah
means the hating of bad.”
Then it says:
“I hate self-exaltation and pride
and the evil way and perverse speech.”
So we need to make sure
that we take out of our hearts
any sort of pride
that could interfere
with our relationship with Jehovah.
That’s very important,
and that’s part of hating what Jehovah hates.
Just think for a moment:
As we’re doing this checklist
to see how our fear of Jehovah is
—is it strong or weak?—
we need to think:
‘What things do I really feel proud about?’
Is there something deep inside you
that you feel,
‘Mmm, yes, I feel really proud about this’?
Well, never forget David’s son Absalom.
He was proud about his hair.
But in the end, it was his hair
that caused him the problem,
and he ended up dying because of his hair
being caught in the branches.
So never would we want to be like Absalom
and allow the thing that we are proud of
to actually cause us a serious problem.
So that’s been interesting
—hasn’t it?—
looking at a second comparison
between the maintenance of a car
and the maintenance of our godly fear.
Just like the brakes,
godly fear can help us to stop
before we do something
that would displease Jehovah.
Now, of course, when we’re thinking
of this matter
of comparing the maintenance of a vehicle
with the maintenance of our spirituality,
there are so many different comparisons
that we could make.
And your mind is
probably already going there thinking,
‘Well, will we make this comparison
or that one?’
But we only have time
for one more comparison.
And you probably won’t think of the one
that we’re going to talk about
—that is, the horn.
You see, in some parts of the world,
drivers say
that the horn is just as important
as the brakes.
Why?
Because they need to let people know
they’re driving along the road.
It could be that someone is beside them
and they’re about to change lanes
and crash into them.
Well, the horn can help.
Or it could be that someone is distracted
and they’re crossing the road.
Again, the horn will help.
So a horn used correctly
can save lives.
So, what do you think
we’re going to compare the horn to
with regard to our spiritual activities?
Well, if we read 1 Timothy together,
1 Timothy 4:16,
we’ll see what the comparison is.
First Timothy 4:16:
“Pay constant attention to yourself
and to your teaching.
“Persevere in these things, for by doing this
you will save both yourself
and those who listen to you.”
So we could say
that just as a horn is important
with regard to a vehicle,
likewise our sounding out the message
of the good news
—our teaching others and telling them
about the nearness of Jehovah’s day—
can result in lives being saved.
But now, if you were to check a horn,
what would you be looking for
or perhaps more importantly listening to?
Well, for a start, you’d try
to test the horn and honk it.
Now, if no sound comes out,
you know you have a problem.
Or, on the other hand,
if the sound is too soft
that nobody can hear it,
that likewise is a problem.
So, what about us?
Do we need to think
about how our proclamation
of “the good news” is?
Yes!
Let’s take not just the normal activities
we’re involved with with our preaching work,
but what about informal witnessing?
Do you see the opportunity?
You think,
‘Yes, I need to talk to this person,’
and
nothing happens.
The horn is not working in a symbolic sense.
Or perhaps we do have the opportunity
and we take it,
but the message is not clear.
So persons don’t really understand
what we’re saying.
So if either of those were the case,
we’d need to see that maintenance is required
with regard to this symbolic horn.
What would we do?
Well, it could involve praying to Jehovah
for courage
—yes, boldness—
to be able to witness to others,
whether it’s informally,
telephone witnessing,
or other forms of witnessing.
And then if we’re not so clear, or coherent,
with regard to how we present the message,
how important it is for us
to practice ahead of time,
to have special sessions
where we practice what we’ll say!
And then in this way, we can be ready
to give a clear message
to those who listen.
Well, that’s been
a very interesting exercise, hasn’t it?
What did we see?
If we’re using this comparison,
this illustration, of a vehicle,
we could say that the engine of a vehicle
is like our godly devotion.
Our devotion to Jehovah
needs to come from our hearts.
And the brakes of a vehicle
we could liken to our fear of Jehovah.
Yes, if we hate what is bad
the same as Jehovah does,
it will stop us, just like brakes do.
And then finally, we discussed this matter
of having a horn
that sounds the message properly.
Yes, we need to make sure
that we ask for Jehovah’s help
to maintain our witnessing in such a way
that we can clearly help others
to hear the message.
So as we’ve gone through this,
I’m sure (as we’ve already mentioned)
you can think of many other comparisons.
But the point is
that a wise driver
does not just drive his car
or motorbike or whatever vehicle it is.
A wise driver also checks to make sure
that the vehicle is safe to use.
So likewise for us,
as 2 Corinthians 13:5 says,
we need to “keep testing.”
Yes, we need to “keep proving”
that we are in the faith.
In other words, keep checking
that we really are Christians,
that we are really living up
to what we believe
and what we teach others to do.
But remember, what is it
that can be a problem for us?
Well, again, if we turn
to the book of Corinthians,
this time 1 Corinthians
chapter 10 and verse 12,
we’ll see what the problem can be.
That’s 1 Corinthians 10:12:
“Let the one who thinks he is standing
beware that he does not fall.”
Yes, just thinking everything is OK
(there are no problems)
and thinking that we’re just going on fine
without testing ourselves
and proving that we’re in the truth
—that can be a problem,
just like lack of maintenance to a vehicle
can result in not only damage
with regard to the vehicle
but also loss of life.
How important then it is
that we continue to keep testing
whether or not we are in the faith,
or in the truth!
So if we do these tests regularly
and if we check to see:
How is our godly devotion going?
How is our fear of Jehovah?
our hatred for what is bad?
How is our sounding out of the message going?
If we see some weaknesses,
what do we need to do?
Well, our final scripture
takes us back to our theme scripture.
Remember, that was 2 Corinthians 13:5,
where it says:
“Keep testing . . . keep proving
what you yourselves are.”
But then if we look down a little further
to verse 11,
we’ll notice what it tells us
that we need to do
if we see some problems.
In verse 11, it tells us:
“Finally, brothers, continue to rejoice,
to be readjusted.”
Now, what does it mean “to be readjusted”?
Well, if you look at verse 9,
you see the same expression is used there
at the end of verse 9.
And the study note to that verse
tells us this:
It says the word is “used to describe
“the restoring of something
to a proper condition.
“For instance, at Mt 4:21,
the [word] . . . is used to describe
‘mending’ nets.”
So nets that are damaged
or have holes in them
—mending them is just like readjusting them.
At Galatians 6:1, the same verb is used
for the need to spiritually readjust
a fellow believer who has taken a false step.
The term is sometimes used in medical text
to describe the setting of a bone,
a limb, or a joint.
So, what’s the point?
If we do this checklist
—go through it—
and we see that somehow
our godly devotion is not as strong
as it should be
and we are just doing things out of routine
but our love for Jehovah is no longer strong,
or if we find that our fear of Jehovah
is not stopping us from doing what is wrong,
or if we are finding that we just are not
thoroughly bearing witness to the good news,
then we need to take action.
What does it involve?
Well, as it says here,
first of all, identifying what the problem is
and then readjusting, repairing,
and (in some places) replacing activities.
So, brothers and sisters,
let’s always remember
that no matter how long
we’ve been in the truth,
no matter what privileges we have,
we need to keep looking at that checklist.
Yes, we need to “keep testing” and “proving”
that we are  in the faith.
Thank you, Brother Jackson,
for helping us to examine our motives
and strengthen our relationship with Jehovah.
Today, we have discussed
what genuine faith is,
and we have considered evidence
that provides a basis for faith.
What can we look forward to
on the next segment of the program?
The scripture theme will be,
“Put up a hard fight for the faith.”
We’ll learn how to put our faith into action
and how to resist things
that could weaken our faith.
We’ll see examples of brothers and sisters
around the earth
who are putting up
“a hard fight for the faith.”
Our closing song is number 119, entitled
“We Must Have Faith.”
Let’s sing song number 119,
and after the song, you may have
your own closing prayer.